Categorical or qualitative data attributes
Categorical or qualitative data attributes are as follows:
These kinds of data attributes are more descriptive
Examples are our written notes, corpora provided by nltk, a corpus that has recorded
different types of breeds of dogs, such as collie, shepherd, and terrier
There are two sub-types of categorical data attributes:
Ordinal data:
This type of data attribute is used to measure non-numeric concepts such as
satisfaction level, happiness level, discomfort level, and so on.
Consider the following questions, for example, which you're to answer from
the options given:
Question 1: How do you feel today?
Options for Question 1:
Very bad
Bad
Good
Happy
Very happy
Now you will choose any of the given options. Suppose you choose
Good, nobody can convert how good you feel to a numeric value.
All the preceding options are non-numeric concepts. Hence, they lie under the
category of ordinal data.
Question 2: How would you rate our hotel service?
Options for Question 2:
Bad
Average
Above average
Good
GreatPractical Understanding of a Corpus and Dataset
[ 30 ]
Now suppose you choose any of the given options. All the aforementioned
options will measure your satisfaction level, and it is difficult to convert your
answer to a numeric value because answers will vary from person to person.
Because one person says Good and another person says Above average, there
may be a chance that they both feel the same about the hotel service but give
different responses. In simple words, you can say that the difference between
one option and the other is unknown. So you can't precisely decide the
numerical values for these kinds of data.
Nominal data:
This type of data attribute is used to record data that doesn't overlap.
Example: What is your gender? The answer is either male or female, and the
answers are not overlapping.
Take another example: What is the color of your eyes? The answer is either
black, brown, blue, or gray. (By the way, we are not considering the color
lenses available in the market!)
In NLP-related applications, we will mainly deal with categorical data attributes. So, to
derive appropriate data points from a corpus that has categorical data attributes is part of
feature engineering. We will see more on this in Chapter 5, Feature Engineering and NLP
Algorithms.
Some corpora contain both sub-types of categorical data.
Numeric or quantitative data attributes
The following are numeric or quantitative data attributes:
These kinds of data attributes are numeric and represent a measurable quantity
Examples: Financial data, population of a city, weight of people, and so on
There are two sub-types of numeric data attributes:
Continuous data:
These kinds of data attributes are continuous
Examples: If you are recording the weight of a student, from 10 to 12 years of
age, whatever data you collect about the student's weight is continuous data;
Iris flower corpusPractical Understanding of a Corpus and Dataset
[ 31 ]
Discrete data:
Discrete data can only take certain values
Examples: If you are rolling two dice, you can only have the resultant values
of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12; you never get 1 or 1.5 as a result if you are
rolling two dice
Take another example: If you toss a coin, you will get either heads or tails
These kinds of data attributes are a major part of analytics applications.
Exploring different file formats for corpora
Corpora can be in many different formats. In practice, we can use the following file formats.
All these file formats are generally us